---
title: New Phone Time
tags: gadgets
date: 2012-05-06
---

I have been using a Palm Pre (Plus) for a while.  It is a great
device; the form factor is excellent with a hardware keyboard and I
really like WebOS.  Unfortunately, the build quality is not so great
so it always felt a bit cheap.  Additionally, it was also always kind
of on the slow side (it took much longer for it to render HTML than it
took to download it, and many other operations were slower still).

HP basically killed off WebOS and there is no new hardware on that
front, so that basically left me to choose which Android phone I
wanted.  Luckily, AT&T was gracious enough to push the release date of
the HTC One X until after Samsung's Galaxy S III launch event so I
could see what the big two had in store this year.  Also fortunately,
Samsung's offering was disappointing enough that I could jump on the
HTC One X without reservations.  HTC definitely won on the design
front and the internals were close enough to not matter to me.
Samsung's only advantage was including a microSD slot, but my on-phone
storage needs are modest enough for that to not factor into my
calculations at all.  Also, based on my interactions with Galaxy
Nexuses, the One X screen is much nicer.

Initially, I was a bit worried about getting a phone this large.
Fortunately, my hands are large enough to deal with it.  I never want
to see a phone larger than this 4.7 inches, though.  Despite its size,
it actually feels lighter than my Pre did, which is pretty weird.  As
everyone else has noted, the screen is stunning and far crisper than
any SuperAMOLED screen I've ever seen.  The phone is also very fast.
Coming from my Pre, it is like night and day.  I'm not used to seeing
such responsiveness in a mobile device.

Many people expressed concern over the battery life.  My usage
patterns are probably weird (I don't want notifications and I don't
poke at it every few minutes), so I can get three full days on a
charge.  The non-removable battery doesn't bother me -- I only removed
the battery in my Pre once and that was to get it to reboot after a
lockup.  I suppose most of the battery life comes from Ice Cream
Sandwich being pretty smart and the newer manufacturing process in the
newer Snapdragon chips.  Battery life was my biggest concern when
upgrading to a modern phone and I am pleased that such concerns were
completely unfounded.

As for software, I never used any prior versions of Android.  I also
haven't had many interactions with stock ICS, so I can't really make
any comparisons to other Android versions.  I do see why some people
complain that Android is a bit inconsistent and scattered compared to
WebOS.  I think I even agree with that assessment, but I think it is
mostly because Android just provides so many more features and so much
more configuration options than WebOS.  Part of the reason WebOS could
be so simple and consistent was just that there was less to do and fit
on screen.  I haven't had any trouble adapting to ICS (with HTC's
Sense mods).  I've read that Sense used to be a gaudy monster, but the
ICS version doesn't seem to have any problems like that.  Everything
also seems much more polished and featureful than WebOS, which isn't
surprising considering the disparity in resources applied to the two
systems.

Overall, I am quite happy with this phone.  Good job HTC.
